# Solar Stream Tools

## Summary
Solar insolation directly affects stream temperature and the primary productivity of streams.   Eco Logical Research, Inc. (ELR) has explored using areal solar insolation for the solar input parameter. South Fork Research, Inc. (SFR) is investigating methods for modeling solar insolation of streams in the Columbia Basin. Specifically, SFR seeks to develop a methodology for modeling solar insolation that will more closely emulate the effects of shading from riparian vegetation and topography.
The Columbia Habitat Monitoring Program (CHaMP) protocol requires the collection of solar insolation data during stream surveys, however, collecting field-based solar insolation measurements comprehensively for the entire stream network of the Columbia Basin is resource prohibitive.  Developing a spatially-explicit model to predict solar insolation for all stream networks and associated riparian buffers within the Columbia Basin will potentially provide a robust, reliable input for GPP modeling efforts, and may preclude the need for field-based data collection. 

The tool relies on raster data derived from the National Biomass and Carbon Dataset (NBCD) basal area-weighted canopy height dataset.  he NBCD was developed by the Woods Hole Research Center in 2000, and combines high-resolution inSAR data acquired by the 2000 Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM), US Forest Service Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) data, and remotely-sensed data from the Landsat ETM+ sensor.  The tool then combines basal-area-weighted canopy height values with bare-earth topographic values from a high-resolution digital elevation model (DEM), resulting in a relatively close approximation of stream shading, when calculating solar insolation using ESRI’s area solar radiation tool. 

